Bronwyn April is a qualified social worker, who had been working as a Youth Development Practitioner previously. We chat to her about living in Europe during the pandemic. What is your background? I studied social work at UCT. I worked with tertiary students in career, personal and training development, all over the Cape Flats. My last job was working for UCT in their careers office as a Youth Development Practitioner. How did you end up in Ireland? I put my Masters off out of fear and insecurity. I applied at colleges in Ireland, and won the Kader Asmal scholarship . The interview was stressful and overwhelming, but I was thankful. I applied at Maynooth, Carlow and Dublin Institute of Technology. I enrolled at Carlow for a MA in Child Youth and Family studies. My thesis explores youth workers working with LGBQTI youth in contemporary Ireland. What was the first Lockdown like? It felt like the apocalypse from the 12th of March. I was walking to campus as the Prime Minister announced a nation-wide Lockdown. People ran to shops and started fighting over toilet paper. I lived in student accommodation with mostly international students. They booked emergency flights home. The scholarship said they will get us home since classes moved online. I was conflicted, I came here for an experience. The other thing was I didn’t have WIFI at home. It would have been impossible to access if I came home in Lockdown. Two of us remained in the complex, with no movement or exercise within two kilometres of home. We could only go out for food. There was no ban on cigarettes and alcohol. I’m a social person so I missed human interaction. At Easter a classmate from another town dropped Easter eggs for me. These check-ins and my purpose here helped me cope. I saw the good and bad in people. The greed and the sharing. Self-care was important for my anxiety and loneliness. I prayed a lot and started baking and selling cakes. I had to focus on my thesis and do zoom classes all online. What do you think about South Africa and how we are coping in lockdown? I complained about loneliness, and back home people were feeling the brunt of disparities with poverty.It is impossible to socially distance in informal settlements. Our workforce is hinged on the backs of Black and Brown people. Yet people were asked to stay home. The government grants are little. In Ireland with 350 Euro you can get so much. R350 in South Africa is not enough to buy food. I pay 45 cents in Ireland for bread. Back home it will be unheard of. You are now in your second lockdown, how is it this time around? The National Public Health Emergency Team advised the government to go into strict lockdown after summer. In level five university schooling is online. Movement within five kilometres of  home, and non-essential workers must stay home. Retailers are closed except for supermarkets.There has been anti-vaccination protests in Dublin. I know now what it is like to be alone. I moved into a house with four people where our interaction is minimal. The Irish Covid relief fund gives Irish people 200 Euros per week. Pub culture is huge so the government has partially subsidised closed pubs. What do the Irish know about South Africa’s response to the Pandemic? The Irish are shocked at our low death rates, in coping with the pandemic.The privileged complain about the same first-world things like holidays and yoga . No worries about the homeless and the poor. It has been frustrating to witness. Socio-economic landscapes are different worldwide. Online teaching highlighted the disparities between the haves and the have nots. I stayed behind for the WIFI. What about people who don’t have access? Digital advancement just drove the wedge deeper. It was so impersonal watching a wedding and a funeral online recently. It has also been a time of showcasing greed and consumerism. Any parting thoughts? I feel very safe here but I miss the heart of Africa. I feel proud from abroad watching South Africans humour. I was happy with the way Lockdown started in South Africa, it showed decisive leadership. As a woman of colour in a Eurocentric space it really made me acknowledge my presence. I am proudly South African. Students back home are ahead of the pack here in Europe. We have always been good enough. It is so lekker to be an African person when you recognise who you are.